---
layout: post
title: My Current Software Toolset
tags:
- data science
- software
---

As someone who started out not knowing a single thing about the development environment, I had to do quite a bit of research to learn things like IDE, text editor, command line/prompt, GUI, and scripts. Getting set up was probably one of the difficult things to learn when starting out. I'm currently learning languages like R and Python so keep in mind some software may differ if you're using another programming language. 

There are some must-haves when doing any sort of programming. The first is a text editor so you can type out your code somewhere and save it. The second is an IDE which is an application that may be built specifically for the language you're working in and allows you to enhance the way you interact with the programming language. The last is a command line terminal. For Mac users, the default terminal is generally very good as it's based on UNIX. For Windows users, like myself, it takes some work to find the right terminal so we can run commands. You may have to tweak it a bit so everything runs smoothly. Anyhow, here are the tools I currently use:

+ Sublime Text 3
+ Enthought Canopy (Python)
+ RStudio (R)
+ Windows PowerShell
+ Microsoft Excel

Sublime Text 3 is an awesome text editor. It supports many languages and many people consider it the best out there. It has plugin support and you can customize it extensively. It makes your life so much easier when writing code. Simple things like tab completion and customizing color schemes is awesome. It is "free" to download and use, but every few saves, you'll get a prompt requesting you to pay for a license. Highly recommend everyone to support the creator(s). Other great alternatives are atom from Github or notepad++.

I use Enthought Canopy Distribution for Python. It has a built in IDE and IPython. The reason I use this is because the university recommends using it, otherwise I have heard good things about Continuum Analytics Anaconda, which is also a Python distribution. I'll most likely give this a try soon.

When using R, RStudio is the go to application. It's simple and quick. Nothing to really say here as it's got everything you need: prompt, package control, and script interface. I'm a huge fan of ggplot and feel it's data visualization is much better than Python.

My command line choice is Windows PowerShell. I use this terminal mainly for managing this website or interfacing with Github. I found PowerShell to be one of the better alternatives for Windows users. It runs quick and works quite well out of the box without much configuration. It just isn't the prettiest terminal out there. Other alternatives are cygwin (for advanced users) or conemu but require some extensive configuration and can be daunting for newcomers.

Lastly, I use Microsoft Excel frequently. Sometimes it's just very useful to be able to see your data in a table and filter through it without having to make queries like you would in SQL (although I love SQL). I also use it if I need to open a csv file or create some quick graphs or tables for assignments.

There's a whole host of software out there, open source too, that can help everyone solve their unique problems. That's what I love about technology nowadays. Everyone isn't pigeon-holed into proprietary software in order to get work done. We have lots of good choices! I'm always interested and excited to learn more tools to improve my own workflow. 
